GROMACS jobs
============

ChemSmart provides initial support for prepared GROMACS workflows.

The implementation follows the standard GROMACS workflow pattern used in the
official GROMACS tutorials: a simulation step is prepared with ``gmx grompp``
and then executed with ``gmx mdrun``. In GROMACS, ``grompp`` assembles the
simulation parameter file, structure file and topology file into a binary
``.tpr`` run input file. The ``mdrun`` command then runs the calculation from
that ``.tpr`` input.

The current ChemSmart implementation focuses on a simplified prepared workflow.
Users provide a prepared structure file and a matching topology file. ChemSmart
can generate a default ``.mdp`` file when it is not provided, call ``grompp`` to
generate a ``.tpr`` file, and then call ``mdrun``.

Supported job types
-------------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 15 25 35 25 35

   * - Job type
     - CLI command
     - Required prepared inputs
     - Auto-generated MDP
     - Notes
   * - EM
     - ``chemsmart run gromacs em``
     - ``structure_file``, ``topology_file`` / ``top_file``
     - ``em.mdp``
     - Energy minimization.
   * - NVT
     - ``chemsmart run gromacs nvt``
     - ``structure_file``, ``topology_file`` / ``top_file``
     - ``nvt.mdp``
     - Constant-volume equilibration.
   * - NPT
     - ``chemsmart run gromacs npt``
     - ``structure_file``, ``topology_file`` / ``top_file``
     - ``npt.mdp``
     - Constant-pressure equilibration.

Relationship to the official GROMACS tutorial
---------------------------------------------

The official GROMACS introductory tutorial uses the following general sequence:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 15 45 45

   * - Step
     - Official tutorial pattern
     - Current ChemSmart prepared workflow
   * - EM
     - ``grompp`` with an EM ``.mdp``, structure and topology, followed by
       ``mdrun``.
     - Supported. ChemSmart can generate ``em.mdp`` if ``mdp_file`` is not
       provided.
   * - NVT
     - ``grompp`` with an NVT ``.mdp``, ``em.gro``, topology and often a
       restraint reference structure through ``-r``, followed by ``mdrun``.
     - Supported in simplified form. ChemSmart currently uses the prepared
       structure and topology, and can generate ``nvt.mdp``.
   * - NPT
     - ``grompp`` with an NPT ``.mdp``, ``nvt.gro``, topology and often the
       NVT checkpoint through ``-t nvt.cpt``, followed by ``mdrun``.
     - Supported in simplified form. ChemSmart currently uses the prepared
       structure and topology, and can generate ``npt.mdp``.

The current prepared workflow does not yet automatically manage all optional
tutorial files, such as restraint reference structures passed with ``-r`` or
checkpoint continuation files passed with ``-t``. These can be added in future
workflow extensions.

Prepared workflow
-----------------

In a prepared workflow, ChemSmart expects the GROMACS structure and topology
to already be consistent with each other.

The minimum required inputs are:

.. code-block:: yaml

   inputs:
     structure_file: input.gro
     topology_file: topol.top

The ``topology_file`` key is accepted as an alias for ``top_file`` in project
YAML files.

If ``topol.top`` includes additional files such as ``.itp`` or ``posre.itp``,
those files must also be available in the working directory or otherwise
resolvable by GROMACS when ``grompp`` is executed.

Automatic topology generation is not included in the prepared workflow yet.

MDP generation
--------------

If an ``mdp_file`` is provided, ChemSmart uses it directly and does not
overwrite it.

If no ``mdp_file`` is provided, ChemSmart generates a default MDP file according
to the selected job type.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 30 35

   * - Job type
     - Generated file
     - Generated by
   * - EM
     - ``em.mdp``
     - ``GromacsInputWriter``
   * - NVT
     - ``nvt.mdp``
     - ``GromacsInputWriter``
   * - NPT
     - ``npt.mdp``
     - ``GromacsInputWriter``

Project YAML structure
----------------------

A GROMACS project YAML file contains three main sections:

``project``
   Defines the project name, job type and workflow mode.

``gromacs_settings``
   Stores common GROMACS settings shared across job types.

``inputs``
   Stores concrete input files for the selected workflow.

The ``gromacs_settings`` section should contain common GROMACS settings only.
Task-specific MDP defaults are handled inside ``GromacsInputWriter`` and should
not be duplicated in the project YAML.

Common GROMACS settings
-----------------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 25 45

   * - Setting
     - Example
     - Description
   * - ``force_field``
     - ``user_provided``
     - Force field name or marker for user-provided topology.
   * - ``water_model``
     - ``spc``
     - Water model used for setup workflows.
   * - ``timestep``
     - ``0.001``
     - MD timestep in ps.
   * - ``temperature``
     - ``300.0``
     - Reference temperature in K.
   * - ``pressure``
     - ``1.0``
     - Reference pressure in bar.
   * - ``constraints``
     - ``none``
     - Constraint setting used by generated MDP files.
   * - ``thermostat``
     - ``V-rescale``
     - Temperature coupling method used by generated MDP files.
   * - ``barostat``
     - ``Parrinello-Rahman``
     - Pressure coupling method used by generated MDP files.
   * - ``grompp_maxwarn``
     - ``0``
     - Optional ``grompp -maxwarn`` value.
   * - ``mdrun_threads``
     - ``1``
     - Optional ``mdrun -nt`` value.

Example prepared EM project
---------------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

   project:
     name: water_prepared_em
     type: gromacs
     job_type: em
     mode: prepared

   gromacs_settings:
     force_field: user_provided
     water_model: spc
     timestep: 0.001
     temperature: 300.0
     pressure: 1.0
     constraints: none
     grompp_maxwarn: 0
     mdrun_threads: 1

   inputs:
     structure_file: water.gro
     topology_file: topol.top

Example prepared NVT project
----------------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

   project:
     name: water_prepared_nvt
     type: gromacs
     job_type: nvt
     mode: prepared

   gromacs_settings:
     force_field: user_provided
     water_model: spc
     timestep: 0.001
     temperature: 300.0
     pressure: 1.0
     constraints: none
     thermostat: V-rescale
     grompp_maxwarn: 0
     mdrun_threads: 1

   inputs:
     structure_file: em.gro
     topology_file: topol.top

Example prepared NPT project
----------------------------

.. code-block:: yaml

   project:
     name: water_prepared_npt
     type: gromacs
     job_type: npt
     mode: prepared

   gromacs_settings:
     force_field: user_provided
     water_model: spc
     timestep: 0.001
     temperature: 300.0
     pressure: 1.0
     constraints: none
     thermostat: V-rescale
     barostat: Parrinello-Rahman
     grompp_maxwarn: 0
     mdrun_threads: 1

   inputs:
     structure_file: nvt.gro
     topology_file: topol.top

Direct CLI examples
-------------------

Run EM with an automatically generated ``em.mdp``:

.. code-block:: bash

   chemsmart run gromacs em \
     --structure input.gro \
     --top topol.top \
     --workflow prepared

Run NVT with an automatically generated ``nvt.mdp``:

.. code-block:: bash

   chemsmart run gromacs nvt \
     --structure em.gro \
     --top topol.top \
     --workflow prepared

Run NPT with an automatically generated ``npt.mdp``:

.. code-block:: bash

   chemsmart run gromacs npt \
     --structure nvt.gro \
     --top topol.top \
     --workflow prepared

Use a custom MDP file:

.. code-block:: bash

   chemsmart run gromacs nvt \
     --mdp nvt.mdp \
     --structure em.gro \
     --top topol.top \
     --workflow prepared

Current limitations
-------------------

The current implementation does not yet generate topology files automatically.

For prepared workflows, users must provide a structure file and a matching
topology file. If the topology includes additional ``.itp`` files, these files
must also be available to GROMACS during ``grompp``.

The current NVT and NPT prepared workflows follow the common ``grompp`` to
``mdrun`` pattern, but they do not yet automatically manage all optional
tutorial files such as position-restraint reference structures or checkpoint
continuation files.