docs/source/configuration-server-settings.rst, before:

#################
 Server Settings
#################

Configure server-specific settings for your HPC cluster or local machine. Server configuration files are YAML files
stored in the ``~/.chemsmart/server/`` directory that define how Chemsmart submits and executes computational chemistry
jobs.

**********************
 Server Configuration
**********************

Overview
========

The ``~/.chemsmart/server/`` directory contains YAML files for different computing environments. Each file defines the
server configuration needed to generate submission scripts. Chemsmart provides several template configurations in
``chemsmart/settings/templates/.chemsmart/server/``:

-  ``SLURM.yaml`` - For clusters using the SLURM scheduler
-  ``PBS.yaml`` - For clusters using the PBS/Torque scheduler
-  ``local.yaml`` - For local workstations without a job scheduler
-  ``small.yaml`` - Example for SLURM with specific resource limits

To use a template, copy it to your ``~/.chemsmart/server/`` directory and customize it:

.. code:: bash

   cp ~/.chemsmart/server/SLURM.yaml ~/.chemsmart/server/myserver.yaml

Then use it with: ``chemsmart sub -s myserver <other commands>``

Configuration Structure
=======================

Each server configuration file contains:

#. **SERVER** section - Defines scheduler and resource allocation settings
#. **Program-specific sections** - Configure individual programs (GAUSSIAN, ORCA, NCIPLOT, etc.)

SERVER Section
==============

The SERVER section defines the job scheduler and compute resource settings.

SCHEDULER
---------

**Type:** String

**Options:** ``SLURM``, ``PBS``, ``Null``

**Description:** The job scheduler system used by your cluster. Set to ``Null`` for local execution without a scheduler.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   SERVER:
       SCHEDULER: SLURM    # For SLURM-based clusters

   SERVER:
       SCHEDULER: PBS      # For PBS/Torque-based clusters

   SERVER:
       SCHEDULER: Null     # For local workstation

QUEUE_NAME
----------

**Type:** String or Null

**Description:** The name of the queue/partition to submit jobs to. This is scheduler-specific and depends on your
cluster configuration. Set to ``Null`` for local execution.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   QUEUE_NAME: normal        # Generic queue name
   QUEUE_NAME: RM-shared     # SLURM partition name
   QUEUE_NAME: RM-small      # SLURM partition with limited resources
   QUEUE_NAME: Null          # No queue for local execution

NUM_HOURS
---------

**Type:** Integer or Null

**Description:** Maximum wall-clock time for the job in hours. Set to ``Null`` for local execution or when not required
by the scheduler.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   NUM_HOURS: 24    # 24-hour time limit
   NUM_HOURS: 48    # 48-hour time limit for long jobs
   NUM_HOURS: 8     # 8-hour time limit for small jobs
   NUM_HOURS: Null  # No time limit for local execution

MEM_GB
------

**Type:** Integer

**Description:** Amount of memory to request in gigabytes (GB).

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   MEM_GB: 400   # Request 400 GB memory
   MEM_GB: 100   # Request 100 GB memory
   MEM_GB: 48    # Request 48 GB memory for smaller jobs
   MEM_GB: 40    # Request 40 GB for local workstation

NUM_CORES
---------

**Type:** Integer

**Description:** Number of CPU cores to request for the job.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   NUM_CORES: 64   # Request 64 cores
   NUM_CORES: 12   # Request 12 cores for smaller jobs

NUM_GPUS
--------

**Type:** Integer or Null

**Description:** Number of GPUs to request. Set to ``0`` or ``Null`` if GPUs are not needed.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   NUM_GPUS: 0     # No GPUs requested
   NUM_GPUS: 1     # Request 1 GPU
   NUM_GPUS: Null  # No GPU specification

NUM_THREADS
-----------

**Type:** Integer

**Description:** Number of threads to use for parallel execution. This typically matches NUM_CORES but can be set
differently depending on the application's threading model.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   NUM_THREADS: 64   # Use 64 threads
   NUM_THREADS: 12   # Use 12 threads

SUBMIT_COMMAND
--------------

**Type:** String or Null

**Description:** The command used to submit jobs to the scheduler. Set to ``Null`` for local execution.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   SUBMIT_COMMAND: sbatch   # For SLURM
   SUBMIT_COMMAND: qsub     # For PBS/Torque
   SUBMIT_COMMAND: Null     # For local execution

PROJECT
-------

**Type:** String or Null (optional)

**Description:** Project or account number for billing/accounting on HPC systems. Comment out or set to ``Null`` if not
required.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   PROJECT: 13003611
   ##PROJECT: 13002374   # Commented out alternative project
   PROJECT: Null         # No project specification

SCRATCH_DIR
-----------

**Type:** String or Null

**Description:** Path to the scratch directory for temporary files. Set to ``null`` if not using a specific scratch
location.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   SCRATCH_DIR: /scratch/user
   SCRATCH_DIR: null

USE_HOSTS
---------

**Type:** Boolean

**Description:** Whether to use host-specific configurations. Set to ``true`` to enable host-based settings, ``false``
to disable.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   USE_HOSTS: true
   USE_HOSTS: false

EXTRA_COMMANDS
--------------

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Additional shell commands to include in the job submission script. This can be used to load modules,
set environment variables, or activate conda environments. Use the pipe (``|``) character to define multiline content.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   EXTRA_COMMANDS: |
       export PATH=$HOME/bin/chemsmart:$PATH
       export PYTHONPATH=$HOME/bin/chemsmart:$PYTHONPATH
       source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
       conda activate chemsmart

Program-Specific Sections
=========================

Each computational chemistry program (GAUSSIAN, ORCA, NCIPLOT) has its own configuration section. These sections define
program-specific paths, execution settings, and environment variables.

GAUSSIAN Section
----------------

Configuration for Gaussian quantum chemistry software.

EXEFOLDER
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** String

**Description:** Path to the Gaussian installation directory.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   GAUSSIAN:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/g16

LOCAL_RUN
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** Boolean

**Description:** Whether to run Gaussian in local/serial mode (``True``) or parallel mode (``False``). When ``True``,
uses serial execution commands; when ``False``, uses parallel execution commands.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   LOCAL_RUN: True   # Use serial execution
   LOCAL_RUN: False  # Use parallel execution

SCRATCH
^^^^^^^

**Type:** Boolean

**Description:** Whether to use a scratch directory for temporary Gaussian files. When ``True``, Gaussian will write
temporary files to the scratch directory specified in ENVARS.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   SCRATCH: True   # Use scratch directory
   SCRATCH: False  # Run in job directory

CONDA_ENV
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Commands to activate the conda environment for Gaussian. Use the pipe (``|``) character for multiline
content.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   CONDA_ENV: |
       source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
       conda activate chemsmart

MODULES
^^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Module loading commands for HPC systems. Use this to load required modules before running Gaussian.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   MODULES: |
       module purge
       module load craype-x86-rome
       module load libfabric/1.11.0.4.125

SCRIPTS
^^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Additional scripts to run before executing Gaussian, such as initialization scripts.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   SCRIPTS: |
       tcsh -c "source ~/bin/g16/bsd/g16.login"

ENVARS
^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Environment variables required by Gaussian. Essential variables include SCRATCH, GAUSS_EXEDIR, and
g16root.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   ENVARS: |
       export SCRATCH=~/scratch
       export GAUSS_EXEDIR=~/bin/g16
       export g16root=~/bin/g16

ORCA Section
------------

Configuration for ORCA quantum chemistry software.

EXEFOLDER
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** String

**Description:** Path to the ORCA installation directory.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   ORCA:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/orca_6_0_0

LOCAL_RUN
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** Boolean

**Description:** Whether to run ORCA in local/serial mode (``True``) or parallel mode (``False``). ORCA typically runs
in parallel mode (``False``).

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   LOCAL_RUN: False  # Use parallel execution

SCRATCH
^^^^^^^

**Type:** Boolean

**Description:** Whether to use a scratch directory for temporary ORCA files.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   SCRATCH: True   # Use scratch directory
   SCRATCH: False  # Run in job directory

CONDA_ENV
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Commands to activate the conda environment for ORCA.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   CONDA_ENV: |
       source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
       conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart

MODULES
^^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Module loading commands required for ORCA, typically including MPI libraries.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   MODULES: |
       module purge
       module load libfabric
       module load openmpi

ENVARS
^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Environment variables required by ORCA, including scratch directory and MPI paths.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   ENVARS: |
       export SCRATCH=~/scratch
       export PATH=$HOME/bin/openmpi-4.1.6/build/bin:$PATH
       export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$HOME/bin/openmpi-4.1.6/build/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH

NCIPLOT Section
---------------

Configuration for NCIPLOT (Non-Covalent Interactions) software.

EXEFOLDER
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** String

**Description:** Path to the NCIPLOT installation directory.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   NCIPLOT:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/nciplot

LOCAL_RUN
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** Boolean

**Description:** Whether to run NCIPLOT in local/serial mode (``True``) or parallel mode (``False``).

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   LOCAL_RUN: False

SCRATCH
^^^^^^^

**Type:** Boolean

**Description:** Whether to use a scratch directory for temporary NCIPLOT files.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   SCRATCH: True

CONDA_ENV
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Commands to activate the conda environment for NCIPLOT.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   CONDA_ENV: |
       source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
       conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart

MODULES
^^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Module loading commands for NCIPLOT.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   MODULES: |
       module purge

ENVARS
^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Environment variables required by NCIPLOT, including NCIPLOT_HOME.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   ENVARS: |
       export SCRATCH=~/scratch
       export NCIPLOT_HOME=~/bin/nciplot

Complete Configuration Examples
===============================

SLURM Cluster Configuration
---------------------------

Complete example for a SLURM-based HPC cluster:

.. code:: yaml

   SERVER:
       SCHEDULER: SLURM
       QUEUE_NAME: normal
       NUM_HOURS: 24
       MEM_GB: 400
       NUM_CORES: 64
       NUM_GPUS: 0
       NUM_THREADS: 64
       SUBMIT_COMMAND: sbatch
       SCRATCH_DIR: null
       USE_HOSTS: true
       EXTRA_COMMANDS: |
           #extra commands to activate chemsmart environment in submission script
   GAUSSIAN:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/g16
       LOCAL_RUN: True
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
           module load craype-x86-rome
           module load libfabric/1.11.0.4.125
       SCRIPTS: |
           tcsh -c "source ~/bin/g16/bsd/g16.login"
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
           export GAUSS_EXEDIR=~/bin/g16
           export g16root=~/bin/g16
   ORCA:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/orca_6_0_0
       LOCAL_RUN: False
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
           module load libfabric
           module load openmpi
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
   NCIPLOT:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/nciplot
       LOCAL_RUN: False
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
           export NCIPLOT_HOME=~/bin/nciplot

PBS/Torque Cluster Configuration
--------------------------------

Complete example for a PBS/Torque-based HPC cluster:

.. code:: yaml

   SERVER:
       SCHEDULER: PBS
       QUEUE_NAME: normal
       NUM_HOURS: 24
       MEM_GB: 400
       NUM_CORES: 64
       NUM_GPUS: 0
       NUM_THREADS: 64
       SUBMIT_COMMAND: qsub
       PROJECT: 13003611
       SCRATCH_DIR: null
       USE_HOSTS: true
       EXTRA_COMMANDS: |
           #extra commands to activate chemsmart environment in submission script
   GAUSSIAN:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/g16
       LOCAL_RUN: True
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
           module load craype-x86-rome
           module load libfabric/1.11.0.4.125
       SCRIPTS: |
           tcsh -c "source ~/bin/g16/bsd/g16.login"
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
           export GAUSS_EXEDIR=~/bin/g16
           export g16root=~/bin/g16
   ORCA:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/orca_6_0_0
       LOCAL_RUN: False
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
           module load libfabric
           module load openmpi
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
   NCIPLOT:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/nciplot
       LOCAL_RUN: False
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
           export NCIPLOT_HOME=~/bin/nciplot

Local Workstation Configuration
-------------------------------

Complete example for a local workstation without a job scheduler:

.. code:: yaml

   SERVER:
       SCHEDULER: Null
       QUEUE_NAME: Null
       NUM_HOURS: Null
       MEM_GB: 40
       NUM_CORES: 12
       NUM_GPUS: 0
       NUM_THREADS: 12
       SUBMIT_COMMAND: Null
       PROJECT: Null
       SCRATCH_DIR: Null
       USE_HOSTS: True
       EXTRA_COMMANDS: |
           #extra commands to activate chemsmart environment in submission script
   GAUSSIAN:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/g16
       LOCAL_RUN: True
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
       SCRIPTS: |
           tcsh -c "source ~/bin/g16/bsd/g16.login"
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
           export GAUSS_EXEDIR=~/bin/g16
           export g16root=~/bin/g16
   ORCA:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/orca_6_0_0
       LOCAL_RUN: False
       SCRATCH: False
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
   NCIPLOT:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/nciplot
       LOCAL_RUN: False
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
           export NCIPLOT_HOME=~/bin/nciplot

Customization Tips
==================

When customizing server configuration files:

#. **Scheduler-specific settings**: Adjust SCHEDULER, QUEUE_NAME, and SUBMIT_COMMAND based on your cluster's job
   scheduler.
#. **Resource limits**: Set NUM_HOURS, MEM_GB, NUM_CORES to match your cluster's queue limits and job requirements.
#. **Module system**: Update MODULES sections to load the correct versions of libraries and tools available on your
   system.
#. **Software paths**: Update EXEFOLDER paths to point to your actual installations of Gaussian, ORCA, and NCIPLOT.
#. **Scratch directories**: Set SCRATCH environment variables to valid paths on your system. Some HPC systems provide
   node-local scratch (e.g., ``/tmp``) while others use network-attached scratch directories.
#. **Conda environments**: Adjust conda activation commands to match your conda installation path and environment names.
#. **Project accounting**: Add or remove PROJECT field based on whether your cluster requires project/account numbers
   for job submission.
#. **MPI configuration**: For ORCA, ensure the MPI library paths are correctly set in ENVARS to match your system's MPI
   installation.

Using Custom Server Configurations
==================================

After creating a custom server configuration file:

#. Save it in ``~/.chemsmart/server/`` with a descriptive name (e.g., ``myserver.yaml``)

#. Use it with Chemsmart commands via the ``-s`` flag:

   .. code:: bash

      chemsmart sub -s myserver -g opt -i input.xyz

#. Verify the generated submission script before submitting to ensure all paths and settings are correct

#. Test with a small job first to validate the configuration works correctly on your system

Commit message:

Revise server settings documentation for clarity
Updated documentation for server configuration settings, including path corrections and additional notes on scratch directories and software versions.

docs/source/configuration-server-settings.rst, after:

#################
 Server Settings
#################

Configure server-specific settings for your HPC cluster or local machine. Server configuration files are YAML files
stored in the ``~/.chemsmart/server/`` directory that define how Chemsmart submits and executes computational chemistry
jobs.  This folder is created automatically when configuring CHEMSMART. Users can access and freely modify the contents 
in this folder without affecting the CHEMSMART codes.

**********************
 Server Configuration
**********************

Overview
========

The ``~/.chemsmart/server/`` directory contains YAML files for different computing environments. Each file defines the
server configuration needed to generate submission scripts. CHEMSMART provides several template configurations in
``/path/to/chemsmart/chemsmart/settings/templates/.chemsmart/server/``:

-  ``SLURM.yaml`` - For clusters using the SLURM scheduler
-  ``PBS.yaml`` - For clusters using the PBS/Torque scheduler
-  ``local.yaml`` - For local workstations without a job scheduler
-  ``small.yaml`` - Example for SLURM with specific resource limits

To use a template, copy it to your ``~/.chemsmart/server/`` directory and customize it:

.. code:: bash

   cp ~/.chemsmart/server/SLURM.yaml ~/.chemsmart/server/myserver.yaml

Then use it with: ``chemsmart sub -s myserver <other commands>``

Configuration Structure
=======================

Each server configuration file contains:

#. **SERVER** section - Defines scheduler and resource allocation settings
#. **Program-specific sections** - Configure individual programs (GAUSSIAN, ORCA, NCIPLOT, etc.)

SERVER Section
==============

The SERVER section defines the job scheduler and compute resource settings.

SCHEDULER
---------

**Type:** String

**Options:** ``SLURM``, ``PBS``, ``Null``

**Description:** The job scheduler system used by your cluster. Set to ``Null`` for local execution without a scheduler.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   SERVER:
       SCHEDULER: SLURM    # For SLURM-based clusters

   SERVER:
       SCHEDULER: PBS      # For PBS/Torque-based clusters

   SERVER:
       SCHEDULER: Null     # For local workstation

QUEUE_NAME
----------

**Type:** String or Null

**Description:** The name of the queue/partition to submit jobs to. This is scheduler-specific and depends on your
cluster configuration. Set to ``Null`` for local execution.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   QUEUE_NAME: normal        # Generic queue name
   QUEUE_NAME: RM-shared     # SLURM partition name
   QUEUE_NAME: RM-small      # SLURM partition with limited resources
   QUEUE_NAME: Null          # No queue for local execution

NUM_HOURS
---------

**Type:** Integer or Null

**Description:** Maximum wall-clock time for the job in hours. Set to ``Null`` for local execution or when not required
by the scheduler.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   NUM_HOURS: 24    # 24-hour time limit
   NUM_HOURS: 48    # 48-hour time limit for long jobs
   NUM_HOURS: 8     # 8-hour time limit for small jobs
   NUM_HOURS: Null  # No time limit for local execution

MEM_GB
------

**Type:** Integer

**Description:** Amount of memory to request in gigabytes (GB).

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   MEM_GB: 400   # Request 400 GB memory
   MEM_GB: 100   # Request 100 GB memory
   MEM_GB: 48    # Request 48 GB memory for smaller jobs
   MEM_GB: 40    # Request 40 GB for local workstation

NUM_CORES
---------

**Type:** Integer

**Description:** Number of CPU cores to request for the job.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   NUM_CORES: 64   # Request 64 cores
   NUM_CORES: 12   # Request 12 cores for smaller jobs

NUM_GPUS
--------

**Type:** Integer or Null

**Description:** Number of GPUs to request. Set to ``0`` or ``Null`` if GPUs are not needed.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   NUM_GPUS: 0     # No GPUs requested
   NUM_GPUS: 1     # Request 1 GPU
   NUM_GPUS: Null  # No GPU specification

NUM_THREADS
-----------

**Type:** Integer

**Description:** Number of threads to use for parallel execution. This typically matches NUM_CORES but can be set
differently depending on the application's threading model.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   NUM_THREADS: 64   # Use 64 threads
   NUM_THREADS: 12   # Use 12 threads

SUBMIT_COMMAND
--------------

**Type:** String or Null

**Description:** The command used to submit jobs to the scheduler. Set to ``Null`` for local execution.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   SUBMIT_COMMAND: sbatch   # For SLURM
   SUBMIT_COMMAND: qsub     # For PBS/Torque
   SUBMIT_COMMAND: Null     # For local execution

PROJECT
-------

**Type:** String or Null (optional)

**Description:** Project or account number for billing/accounting on HPC systems. Comment out or set to ``Null`` if not
required.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   PROJECT: 13003611
   ##PROJECT: 13002374   # Commented out alternative project
   PROJECT: Null         # No project specification

SCRATCH_DIR
-----------

**Type:** String or Null

**Description:** Path to the scratch directory for temporary files. Set to ``null`` if not using a specific scratch
location. Note that both Gaussian and ORCA calculations are by default run in scratch directory, thus, it is recommended
to set up the path to scratch directory. See the section on setting up scratch directory.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   SCRATCH_DIR: /scratch/user
   SCRATCH_DIR: null

USE_HOSTS
---------

**Type:** Boolean

**Description:** Whether to use host-specific configurations. Set to ``true`` to enable host-based settings, ``false``
to disable.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   USE_HOSTS: true
   USE_HOSTS: false

EXTRA_COMMANDS
--------------

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Additional shell commands to include in the job submission script. This can be used to load modules,
set environment variables, or activate conda environments. Use the pipe (``|``) character to define multiline content.

**Examples:**

.. code:: yaml

   EXTRA_COMMANDS: |
       export PATH=$HOME/bin/chemsmart:$PATH
       export PYTHONPATH=$HOME/bin/chemsmart:$PYTHONPATH
       source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
       conda activate chemsmart

Program-Specific Sections
=========================

Each computational chemistry program (GAUSSIAN, ORCA, NCIPLOT) has its own configuration section. These sections define
program-specific paths, execution settings, and environment variables.

GAUSSIAN Section
----------------

Configuration for Gaussian quantum chemistry software.

EXEFOLDER
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** String

**Description:** Path to the Gaussian installation directory.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   GAUSSIAN:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/g16

LOCAL_RUN
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** Boolean

**Description:** Whether to run Gaussian in local/serial mode (``True``) or parallel mode (``False``). When ``True``,
uses serial execution commands; when ``False``, uses parallel execution commands.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   LOCAL_RUN: True   # Use serial execution
   LOCAL_RUN: False  # Use parallel execution

SCRATCH
^^^^^^^

**Type:** Boolean

**Description:** Whether to use a scratch directory for temporary Gaussian files. When ``True``, Gaussian will write
temporary files to the scratch directory specified in ENVARS.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   SCRATCH: True   # Use scratch directory
   SCRATCH: False  # Run in job directory

CONDA_ENV
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Commands to activate the conda environment for Gaussian. Use the pipe (``|``) character for multiline
content.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   CONDA_ENV: |
       source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
       conda activate chemsmart

MODULES
^^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Module loading commands for HPC systems. Use this to load required modules before running Gaussian.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   MODULES: |
       module purge
       module load craype-x86-rome
       module load libfabric/1.11.0.4.125

SCRIPTS
^^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Additional scripts to run before executing Gaussian, such as initialization scripts.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   SCRIPTS: |
       tcsh -c "source ~/bin/g16/bsd/g16.login"

ENVARS
^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Environment variables required by Gaussian. Essential variables include SCRATCH, GAUSS_EXEDIR, and
g16root.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   ENVARS: |
       export SCRATCH=~/scratch
       export GAUSS_EXEDIR=~/bin/g16
       export g16root=~/bin/g16

ORCA Section
------------

Configuration for ORCA quantum chemistry software.

EXEFOLDER
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** String

**Description:** Path to the ORCA installation directory.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   ORCA:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/orca_6_0_0

LOCAL_RUN
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** Boolean

**Description:** Whether to run ORCA in local/serial mode (``True``) or parallel mode (``False``). ORCA typically runs
in parallel mode (``False``).

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   LOCAL_RUN: False  # Use parallel execution

SCRATCH
^^^^^^^

**Type:** Boolean

**Description:** Whether to use a scratch directory for temporary ORCA files.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   SCRATCH: True   # Use scratch directory
   SCRATCH: False  # Run in job directory

CONDA_ENV
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Commands to activate the conda environment for ORCA.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   CONDA_ENV: |
       source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
       conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart

MODULES
^^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Module loading commands required for ORCA, typically including MPI libraries.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   MODULES: |
       module purge
       module load libfabric
       module load openmpi

ENVARS
^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Environment variables required by ORCA, including scratch directory and MPI paths.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   ENVARS: |
       export SCRATCH=~/scratch
       export PATH=$HOME/bin/openmpi-4.1.6/build/bin:$PATH
       export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$HOME/bin/openmpi-4.1.6/build/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH

NCIPLOT Section
---------------

Configuration for NCIPLOT software for Non-Covalent Interactions analysis.

EXEFOLDER
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** String

**Description:** Path to the NCIPLOT installation directory.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   NCIPLOT:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/nciplot

LOCAL_RUN
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** Boolean

**Description:** Whether to run NCIPLOT in local/serial mode (``True``) or parallel mode (``False``).

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   LOCAL_RUN: False

SCRATCH
^^^^^^^

**Type:** Boolean

**Description:** Whether to use a scratch directory for temporary NCIPLOT files.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   SCRATCH: True

CONDA_ENV
^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Commands to activate the conda environment for NCIPLOT.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   CONDA_ENV: |
       source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
       conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart

MODULES
^^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Module loading commands for NCIPLOT.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   MODULES: |
       module purge

ENVARS
^^^^^^

**Type:** Multiline string

**Description:** Environment variables required by NCIPLOT, including NCIPLOT_HOME.

**Example:**

.. code:: yaml

   ENVARS: |
       export SCRATCH=~/scratch
       export NCIPLOT_HOME=~/bin/nciplot

Complete Configuration Examples
===============================

SLURM Cluster Configuration
---------------------------

Complete example for a SLURM-based HPC cluster:

.. code:: yaml

   SERVER:
       SCHEDULER: SLURM
       QUEUE_NAME: normal
       NUM_HOURS: 24
       MEM_GB: 400
       NUM_CORES: 64
       NUM_GPUS: 0
       NUM_THREADS: 64
       SUBMIT_COMMAND: sbatch
       SCRATCH_DIR: null
       USE_HOSTS: true
       EXTRA_COMMANDS: |
           #extra commands to activate chemsmart environment in submission script
   GAUSSIAN:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/g16
       LOCAL_RUN: True
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
           module load craype-x86-rome
           module load libfabric/1.11.0.4.125
       SCRIPTS: |
           tcsh -c "source ~/bin/g16/bsd/g16.login"
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
           export GAUSS_EXEDIR=~/bin/g16
           export g16root=~/bin/g16
   ORCA:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/orca_6_1_0
       LOCAL_RUN: False
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
           module load libfabric
           module load openmpi
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
   NCIPLOT:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/nciplot
       LOCAL_RUN: False
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
           export NCIPLOT_HOME=~/bin/nciplot

PBS/Torque Cluster Configuration
--------------------------------

Complete example for a PBS/Torque-based HPC cluster:

.. code:: yaml

   SERVER:
       SCHEDULER: PBS
       QUEUE_NAME: normal
       NUM_HOURS: 24
       MEM_GB: 400
       NUM_CORES: 64
       NUM_GPUS: 0
       NUM_THREADS: 64
       SUBMIT_COMMAND: qsub
       PROJECT: 13003611
       SCRATCH_DIR: null
       USE_HOSTS: true
       EXTRA_COMMANDS: |
           #extra commands to activate chemsmart environment in submission script
   GAUSSIAN:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/g16
       LOCAL_RUN: True
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
           module load craype-x86-rome
           module load libfabric/1.11.0.4.125
       SCRIPTS: |
           tcsh -c "source ~/bin/g16/bsd/g16.login"
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
           export GAUSS_EXEDIR=~/bin/g16
           export g16root=~/bin/g16
   ORCA:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/orca_6_0_0
       LOCAL_RUN: False
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
           module load libfabric
           module load openmpi
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
   NCIPLOT:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/nciplot
       LOCAL_RUN: False
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
           export NCIPLOT_HOME=~/bin/nciplot

Local Workstation Configuration
-------------------------------

Complete example for a local workstation without a job scheduler:

.. code:: yaml

   SERVER:
       SCHEDULER: Null
       QUEUE_NAME: Null
       NUM_HOURS: Null
       MEM_GB: 40
       NUM_CORES: 12
       NUM_GPUS: 0
       NUM_THREADS: 12
       SUBMIT_COMMAND: Null
       PROJECT: Null
       SCRATCH_DIR: Null
       USE_HOSTS: True
       EXTRA_COMMANDS: |
           #extra commands to activate chemsmart environment in submission script
   GAUSSIAN:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/g16
       LOCAL_RUN: True
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
       SCRIPTS: |
           tcsh -c "source ~/bin/g16/bsd/g16.login"
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
           export GAUSS_EXEDIR=~/bin/g16
           export g16root=~/bin/g16
   ORCA:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/orca_6_0_0
       LOCAL_RUN: False
       SCRATCH: False
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
   NCIPLOT:
       EXEFOLDER: ~/bin/nciplot
       LOCAL_RUN: False
       SCRATCH: True
       CONDA_ENV: |
           source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
           conda activate ~/miniconda3/envs/chemsmart
       MODULES: |
           module purge
       ENVARS: |
           export SCRATCH=~/scratch
           export NCIPLOT_HOME=~/bin/nciplot

Customization Tips
==================

When customizing server configuration files:

#. **Scheduler-specific settings**: Adjust SCHEDULER, QUEUE_NAME, and SUBMIT_COMMAND based on your cluster's job
   scheduler.
#. **Resource limits**: Set NUM_HOURS, MEM_GB, NUM_CORES to match your cluster's queue limits and job requirements.
#. **Module system**: Update MODULES sections to load the correct versions of libraries and tools available on your
   system.
#. **Software paths**: Update EXEFOLDER paths to point to your actual installations of Gaussian, ORCA, and NCIPLOT.
   This will be automatically updated when configuring CHEMSMART during the configuration phase.
#. **Scratch directories**: Set SCRATCH environment variables to valid paths on your system. Some HPC systems provide
   node-local scratch (e.g., ``/tmp``) while others use network-attached scratch directories.
#. **Conda environments**: Adjust conda activation commands to match your conda installation path and environment names.
#. **Project accounting**: Add or remove PROJECT field based on whether your cluster requires project/account numbers
   for job submission.
#. **MPI configuration**: For ORCA, ensure the MPI library paths are correctly set in ENVARS to match your system's MPI
   installation.

Using Custom Server Configurations
==================================

After creating a custom server configuration file:

#. Save it in ``~/.chemsmart/server/`` with a descriptive name (e.g., ``myserver.yaml``)

#. Use it with Chemsmart commands via the ``-s`` flag:

   .. code:: bash

      chemsmart sub -s myserver -g opt -i input.xyz

#. Verify the generated submission script to ensure all paths and settings are correct

#. Test with a small job first to validate the configuration works correctly on your system
