docs/source/configuration-project-settings.rst, before:

##################
 Project Settings
##################

Configure project-specific settings for Gaussian and ORCA calculations.

***************************
 Gaussian Project Settings
***************************

The ``~/.chemsmart/gaussian/`` directory contains project settings files specifying DFT functionals, basis sets, and
other calculation parameters.

Job Type Settings
=================

Project settings are organized by job type, allowing you to specify different computational methods for different phases
of your calculations:

-  ``gas``: Used for geometry optimization, transition state searches, and other gas-phase structural calculations.
-  ``solv``: Used for single point energy calculations in solution.
-  ``td``: Used for TD-DFT (time-dependent DFT) calculations for excited states and UV-Vis spectra.

Example 1: Basic Multi-Phase Settings
=====================================

This example (``~/.chemsmart/gaussian/test.yaml``) demonstrates how to configure different settings for gas-phase
optimizations, solution-phase single points, and TD-DFT calculations:

.. code:: yaml

   gas:
     ab_initio: Null
     functional: m062x
     basis: def2svp
     semiempirical: Null
     solvent_model: smd
     solvent_id: dichloroethane
   solv:
     functional: m062x
     basis: def2tzvp
     freq: False
     solvent_model: smd
     solvent_id: dichloroethane
   td:
     functional: cam-b3lyp
     basis: genecp
     heavy_elements: ['I']
     heavy_elements_basis: def2-SVPD
     light_elements_basis: def2SVP
     freq: False

In this configuration:

-  **Gas phase** optimizations use M062X/def2-SVP with SMD(dichloroethane) implicit solvation
-  **Solution phase** single points use M062X/def2-TZVP with higher basis set for better energies
-  **TD-DFT** calculations use CAM-B3LYP with mixed basis sets (GENECP) for systems containing iodine

Example 2: Mixed Element Basis Sets
===================================

For systems with transition metals or heavy elements, you can specify different basis sets for different elements
(``~/.chemsmart/gaussian/test2.yaml``):

.. code:: yaml

   gas:
     functional: b3lyp
     basis: genecp
     additional_route_parameters: empiricaldispersion=gd3bj
     heavy_elements: ['Pd', 'Ag', 'Br', 'Cu', 'Mn']
     heavy_elements_basis: def2-TZVPPD
     light_elements_basis: def2-SVP
   solv:
     functional: b3lyp
     freq: False
     basis: def2qzvp
     additional_route_parameters: empiricaldispersion=gd3bj
     solvent_model: smd
     solvent_id: TetraHydroFuran

This configuration:

-  Uses B3LYP-D3(BJ) functional with Grimme's D3 dispersion correction
-  Assigns def2-TZVPPD basis to heavy elements (Pd, Ag, Br, Cu, Mn)
-  Assigns def2-SVP basis to light elements (H, C, N, O, etc.)
-  Solution phase calculations use uniform def2-QZVP basis for high accuracy

Example 3: Custom Solvent Parameters
====================================

For non-standard solvents, you can define custom solvent parameters (``~/.chemsmart/gaussian/test3.yaml``):

.. code:: yaml

   gas:
     functional: mn15
     basis: genecp
     heavy_elements: ['Rh','Ag','Br','Cu', 'Pd']
     heavy_elements_basis: def2tzvpd
     light_elements_basis: def2svp
   solv:
     functional: mn15
     basis: def2qzvp
     freq: False
     solvent_model: smd
     solvent_id: generic
     custom_solvent : |
       solventname=1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoropropan-2-ol
       eps=16.7
       epsinf=1.625625 !(not really needed for gs properties)
       HBondAcidity=0.77
       HBondBasicity=0.10
       SurfaceTensionAtInterface=23.23
       CarbonAromaticity=0.0
       ElectronegativeHalogenicity=0.60

This example shows how to:

-  Define custom solvent properties (dielectric constant, H-bonding parameters, etc.)
-  Use MN15 functional with mixed basis sets for transition metal systems
-  Set ``solvent_id: generic`` and provide detailed parameters via ``custom_solvent``

Special Settings
================

To run all calculations with solvent (skip gas phase), set ``gas: Null``:

.. code:: yaml

   gas: Null

***********************
 ORCA Project Settings
***********************

The ``~/.chemsmart/orca/`` directory contains ORCA project settings files.

Job Type Settings
=================

Similar to Gaussian, ORCA project settings support multiple job types:

-  ``gas``: Used for geometry optimization and transition state searches in gas phase.
-  ``solv``: Used for single point energy calculations, often with higher-level methods.

Example: DFT Optimization with High-Level Single Points
=======================================================

This example (``~/.chemsmart/orca/test.yaml``) demonstrates a common workflow: geometry optimization with DFT followed
by high-accuracy single point calculations using coupled cluster methods:

.. code:: yaml

   gas:
     functional: M062X
     basis: def2-SVP
   solv:
     ab_initio: DLPNO-CCSD(T)
     functional: Null
     basis: Extrapolate(2/3,cc)
     aux_basis: AutoAux
     defgrid: DEFGRID3
     freq: False
     scf_tol: TightSCF
     scf_algorithm: KDIIS
     scf_maxiter: 500
     mdci_cutoff: Normal
     mdci_density: None
     dipole: False
     solvent_model: SMD
     solvent_id: "toluene"

This configuration:

-  **Gas phase**: Performs geometry optimizations using M062X/def2-SVP DFT method

-  **Solution phase**: Performs high-accuracy single point energies with DLPNO-CCSD(T) using:

   -  Complete basis set (CBS) extrapolation from cc-pVDZ and cc-pVTZ (``Extrapolate(2/3,cc)``)
   -  Automatic auxiliary basis set selection (``AutoAux``)
   -  Tight SCF convergence with KDIIS algorithm
   -  SMD implicit solvation model with toluene as solvent
   -  MDCI (Modified Davidson Configuration Interaction) cutoff parameters

This workflow is efficient for obtaining highly accurate energies on DFT-optimized geometries, commonly used for
thermochemistry and reaction energetics.

Key ORCA-Specific Parameters
============================

-  ``ab_initio``: Specifies post-HF methods (e.g., DLPNO-CCSD(T), CCSD, MP2)
-  ``functional``: DFT functional (set to ``Null`` when using pure ab initio methods)
-  ``basis``: Basis set specification, supports extrapolation schemes
-  ``aux_basis``: Auxiliary basis for RI approximations (``AutoAux`` for automatic selection)
-  ``defgrid``: Integration grid quality (DEFGRID1-3)
-  ``scf_tol``: SCF convergence threshold (``TightSCF``, ``VeryTightSCF``)
-  ``scf_algorithm``: SCF convergence algorithm (``KDIIS``, ``SOSCF``)
-  ``mdci_cutoff``: MDCI method cutoff settings (``Loose``, ``Normal``, ``Tight``)
-  ``mdci_density``: Density treatment in MDCI (must be the string ``"None"``, not YAML null value)

*******************
 Scratch Directory
*******************

Set up scratch directories for Gaussian and ORCA jobs:

.. code:: bash

   ln -s /path/to/scratch/ ~/scratch

.. note::

   If ``freq: False`` is not set, frequency calculations are performed by default for all geometry optimization jobs.

Commit message:

Enhance documentation for Gaussian and ORCA settings
Clarify project settings for Gaussian and ORCA, including details on job types, basis sets, and frequency calculations.

docs/source/configuration-project-settings.rst, after:

##################
 Project Settings
##################

Configure project-specific settings for Gaussian and ORCA calculations.

***************************
 Gaussian Project Settings
***************************

The ``~/.chemsmart/gaussian/`` directory contains project settings files specifying DFT functionals, basis sets, and
other calculation parameters. This folder is created automatically when configuring CHEMSMART. Users can access and
freely modify the contents in this folder without affecting the CHEMSMART codes.

Job Type Settings
=================

Project settings are organized by job type, allowing you to specify different computational methods for different phases
of your calculations:

-  ``gas``: Used for geometry optimization, transition state searches, and other gas-phase structural calculations.
-  ``solv``: Used for single point energy calculations in solution.
-  ``td``: Used for TD-DFT (time-dependent DFT) calculations for excited states and UV-Vis spectra.

If ``gas: Null`` is set, then all job types will be run in solvent phase specified by ``solv``.

Example 1: Basic Multi-Phase Settings
=====================================

This example (``~/.chemsmart/gaussian/test.yaml``) demonstrates how to configure different settings for gas-phase
optimizations, solution-phase single points, and TD-DFT calculations:

.. code:: yaml

   gas:
     ab_initio: Null
     functional: m062x
     basis: def2svp
     semiempirical: Null
     solvent_model: smd
     solvent_id: dichloroethane
   solv:
     functional: m062x
     basis: def2tzvp
     freq: False
     solvent_model: smd
     solvent_id: dichloroethane
   td:
     functional: cam-b3lyp
     basis: genecp
     heavy_elements: ['I']
     heavy_elements_basis: def2-SVPD
     light_elements_basis: def2SVP
     freq: False

In this configuration:

-  **Gas phase** optimizations use M062X/def2-SVP with SMD(dichloroethane) implicit solvation
-  **Solution phase** single points use M062X/def2-TZVP with higher basis set for better energies
-  **TD-DFT** calculations use CAM-B3LYP with mixed basis sets (GENECP) for systems containing iodine where ``I`` element takes def2-SVPD basis set whereas all other elements take def2-SVP basis set.

Example 2: Mixed Element Basis Sets
===================================

For systems with transition metals or heavy elements (or in fact any system), you can specify different basis sets for different elements,
as seen in example project settings file in ``~/.chemsmart/gaussian/test2.yaml``:

.. code:: yaml

   gas:
     functional: b3lyp
     basis: genecp
     additional_route_parameters: empiricaldispersion=gd3bj
     heavy_elements: ['Pd', 'Ag', 'Br', 'Cu', 'Mn']
     heavy_elements_basis: def2-TZVPPD
     light_elements_basis: def2-SVP
   solv:
     functional: b3lyp
     freq: False
     basis: def2qzvp
     additional_route_parameters: empiricaldispersion=gd3bj
     solvent_model: smd
     solvent_id: TetraHydroFuran

This configuration:

-  Uses B3LYP-D3(BJ) functional with Grimme's D3 dispersion correction
-  Assigns def2-TZVPPD basis to heavy elements (Pd, Ag, Br, Cu, Mn); if such elements do not occur in the molecule, it will be simply ignored.
-  Assigns def2-SVP basis to all other light elements (H, C, N, O, etc.)
-  Solution phase calculations use uniform def2-QZVP basis set for all atoms for high accuracy

Example 3: Custom Solvent Parameters
====================================

For non-standard solvents, you can define custom solvent parameters (``~/.chemsmart/gaussian/test3.yaml``):

.. code:: yaml

   gas:
     functional: mn15
     basis: genecp
     heavy_elements: ['Rh','Ag','Br','Cu', 'Pd']
     heavy_elements_basis: def2tzvpd
     light_elements_basis: def2svp
   solv:
     functional: mn15
     basis: def2qzvp
     freq: False
     solvent_model: smd
     solvent_id: generic
     custom_solvent : |
       solventname=1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoropropan-2-ol
       eps=16.7
       epsinf=1.625625 !(not really needed for gs properties)
       HBondAcidity=0.77
       HBondBasicity=0.10
       SurfaceTensionAtInterface=23.23
       CarbonAromaticity=0.0
       ElectronegativeHalogenicity=0.60

This example shows how to:

-  Define custom solvent properties (dielectric constant, H-bonding parameters, etc.)
-  Use MN15 functional with mixed basis sets for transition metal systems
-  Set ``solvent_id: generic`` and provide detailed parameters via ``custom_solvent``

Special Settings
================

To run all calculations with solvent (skip gas phase), set ``gas: Null``:

.. code:: yaml

   gas: Null

Other project settings can also be specified, for example, if one requires ``#p`` dieze tag for Gaussian input, then
in the project settings, one can add

.. code:: yaml

   gas:
     dieze_tag: p
     functional: M062X
     basis: def2svp
to specify it and allow automatically inclusion of it in input file writing.

.. note::

   If ``freq: False`` is not set, frequency calculations are performed by default for all geometry optimization jobs.

***********************
 ORCA Project Settings
***********************

The ``~/.chemsmart/orca/`` directory contains ORCA project settings files.

Job Type Settings
=================

Similar to Gaussian, ORCA project settings support multiple job types:

-  ``gas``: Used for geometry optimization and transition state searches in gas phase.
-  ``solv``: Used for single point energy calculations, often with higher-level methods.

Example: DFT Optimization with High-Level Single Points
=======================================================

This example (``~/.chemsmart/orca/test.yaml``) demonstrates a common workflow: geometry optimization with DFT followed
by high-accuracy single point calculations using coupled cluster methods:

.. code:: yaml

   gas:
     functional: M062X
     basis: def2-SVP
   solv:
     ab_initio: DLPNO-CCSD(T)
     functional: Null
     basis: Extrapolate(2/3,cc)
     aux_basis: AutoAux
     defgrid: DEFGRID3
     freq: False
     scf_tol: TightSCF
     scf_algorithm: KDIIS
     scf_maxiter: 500
     mdci_cutoff: Normal
     mdci_density: None
     dipole: False
     solvent_model: SMD
     solvent_id: "toluene"

This configuration:

-  **Gas phase**: Performs geometry optimizations using M062X/def2-SVP DFT method

-  **Solution phase**: Performs high-accuracy single point energies with DLPNO-CCSD(T) using:

   -  Complete basis set (CBS) extrapolation from cc-pVDZ and cc-pVTZ (``Extrapolate(2/3,cc)``)
   -  Automatic auxiliary basis set selection (``AutoAux``)
   -  Tight SCF convergence with KDIIS algorithm
   -  SMD implicit solvation model with toluene as solvent
   -  MDCI (Modified Davidson Configuration Interaction) cutoff parameters

This workflow is efficient for obtaining highly accurate energies on DFT-optimized geometries, commonly used for
thermochemistry and reaction energetics. One can simply use Gaussian .log file as input for chemsmart to automatically
create ORCA single-point .inp file in a single command (see later examples).

Key ORCA-Specific Parameters
============================

-  ``ab_initio``: Specifies post-HF methods (e.g., DLPNO-CCSD(T), CCSD, MP2)
-  ``functional``: DFT functional (set to ``Null`` when using pure ab initio methods)
-  ``basis``: Basis set specification, supports extrapolation schemes
-  ``aux_basis``: Auxiliary basis for RI approximations (``AutoAux`` for automatic selection)
-  ``defgrid``: Integration grid quality (DEFGRID1-3)
-  ``scf_tol``: SCF convergence threshold (``TightSCF``, ``VeryTightSCF``)
-  ``scf_algorithm``: SCF convergence algorithm (``KDIIS``, ``SOSCF``)
-  ``mdci_cutoff``: MDCI method cutoff settings (``Loose``, ``Normal``, ``Tight``)
-  ``mdci_density``: Density treatment in MDCI (must be the string ``"None"``, not YAML null value)

*******************
 Scratch Directory
*******************

Set up scratch directories for Gaussian and ORCA jobs:

.. code:: bash

   ln -s /path/to/scratch/ ~/scratch
