docs/source/mol_generalcliforallmoljobs.rst, before:

Welcome to the tutorials! We're thrilled to have you here. Please go through the code examples, and don't hesitate to
contact our team if you have questions or feedback.

######################################
 General CLI Options for All Mol Jobs
######################################

ChemSmart provides comprehensive command-line options for molecular visualization and analysis using PyMOL. Use
``chemsmart run mol --help`` for detailed information about all available options.

*************************
 Basic Command Structure
*************************

The basic command structure for Mol jobs is:

.. code:: console

   chemsmart run [OPTIONS] mol [MOL_OPTIONS] <SUBCMD> [SUBCMD_OPTIONS]

*************
 MOL_OPTIONS
*************

Works for all Mol jobs

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 15 55

   -  -  Option
      -  Type
      -  Description

   -  -  ``-f, --filename``
      -  string
      -  Filename from which new Gaussian input is prepared.

   -  -  ``-l, --label``
      -  string
      -  Write user input filename for the job (without extension). Will overwrite your original filename (default=None)

   -  -  ``-a, --append-label``
      -  string
      -  Name to be appended to file for the job. Will append name to current filename (default=None)

   -  -  ``-i, --index``
      -  string
      -  Index of molecules to use; 1-based indices. Default to the last molecule structure (default="-1")

   -  -  ``--pubchem``
      -  string
      -  Get molecule structure from PubChem database using identifier (default=None)

   -  -  ``-o, --overwrite``
      -  bool
      -  Overwrite existing files (default=False)

*******************************
 SUBCMD for Different Mol Jobs
*******************************

.. list-table:: Basic Visualization
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 15 85

   -  -  Subcommand
      -  Description
   -  -  ``visualize``
      -  CLI for running automatic PyMOL visualization and saving as pse file
   -  -  ``movie``
      -  CLI for generating automatic PyMOL movie for rotating molecules

.. list-table:: Reaction Analysis
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 15 85

   -  -  Subcommand
      -  Description
   -  -  ``irc``
      -  CLI for generating automatic PyMOL IRC movie and saving the trajectory

.. list-table:: Electronic Structure Analysis
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 15 85

   -  -  Subcommand
      -  Description
   -  -  ``mo``
      -  CLI for generating molecular orbitals (MOs) and saving as pse file
   -  -  ``spin``
      -  CLI for generating spin density and saving as pse file

.. list-table:: Interaction Analysis
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 15 85

   -  -  Subcommand
      -  Description
   -  -  ``nci``
      -  CLI for generating automatic PyMOL NCI plot and saving as pse file

************
 Next Steps
************

For specific visualization types, see the detailed tutorials:

-  Run Basic Visualization Jobs
-  Run Reaction Analysis Jobs
-  Run Electronic Structure Analysis Jobs
-  Run Interaction Analysis Jobs

Commit message:

update align branch after discussion 11.12

docs/source/mol_generalcliforallmoljobs.rst, after:

Welcome to the tutorials! We're thrilled to have you here. Please go through the code examples, and don't hesitate to
contact our team if you have questions or feedback.

######################################
 General CLI Options for All Mol Jobs
######################################

ChemSmart provides comprehensive command-line options for molecular visualization and analysis using PyMOL. Use
``chemsmart run mol --help`` for detailed information about all available options.

*************************
 Basic Command Structure
*************************

The basic command structure for Mol jobs is:

.. code:: console

   chemsmart run [OPTIONS] mol [MOL_OPTIONS] <SUBCMD> [SUBCMD_OPTIONS]

*************
 MOL_OPTIONS
*************

Works for all Mol jobs

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 15 55

   -  -  Option
      -  Type
      -  Description

   -  -  ``-f, --filenames``
      -  string
      -  Filename from which new Gaussian input is prepared (Multiple usage is only for align job)

   -  -  ``-d, --directory``
      -  string
      -  Directory in which to run mol align job (only for align job)

   -  -  ``-t, --filetype``
      -  string
      -  Type of file to run mol align job, if directory is specified (only for align job)

   -  -  ``-l, --label``
      -  string
      -  Write user input filename for the job (without extension). Will overwrite your original filename (default=None)

   -  -  ``-a, --append-label``
      -  string
      -  Name to be appended to file for the job. Will append name to current filename (default=None)

   -  -  ``-i, --index``
      -  string
      -  Index of molecules to use; 1-based indices. Default to the last molecule structure (default="-1")

   -  -  ``--pubchem``
      -  string
      -  Get molecule structure from PubChem database using identifier (default=None)

   -  -  ``-o, --overwrite``
      -  bool
      -  Overwrite existing files (default=False)

*******************************
 SUBCMD for Different Mol Jobs
*******************************

.. list-table:: Basic Visualization
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 15 85

   -  -  Subcommand
      -  Description
   -  -  ``visualize``
      -  CLI for running automatic PyMOL visualization and saving as pse file
   -  -  ``movie``
      -  CLI for generating automatic PyMOL movie for rotating molecules

.. list-table:: Reaction Analysis
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 15 85

   -  -  Subcommand
      -  Description
   -  -  ``irc``
      -  CLI for generating automatic PyMOL IRC movie and saving the trajectory

.. list-table:: Electronic Structure Analysis
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 15 85

   -  -  Subcommand
      -  Description
   -  -  ``mo``
      -  CLI for generating molecular orbitals (MOs) and saving as pse file
   -  -  ``spin``
      -  CLI for generating spin density and saving as pse file

.. list-table:: Interaction Analysis
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 15 85

   -  -  Subcommand
      -  Description
   -  -  ``nci``
      -  CLI for generating automatic PyMOL NCI plot and saving as pse file

************
 Next Steps
************

For specific visualization types, see the detailed tutorials:

-  Run Basic Visualization Jobs
-  Run Reaction Analysis Jobs
-  Run Electronic Structure Analysis Jobs
-  Run Interaction Analysis Jobs
